 Demand and supply shifters are highly relevant to our cap example.
 Let's first focus on the demand side.
 Demand for certain agricultural products is constantly changing depending on consumers'
 incomes, preferences for certain goods, and the prices of substitutes and compliment goods.
 For example, people may increasingly want to buy organic food because of health concerns.
 This would increase the demand for organic food.
 Likewise, if health concerns cost consumers to avoid eating beef, this would affect both
 the demand for beef and likely for vegetables, which are a substitute for beef.
 Income is another factor that may shift demand.
 Concrete example for cap is the Eurozone debt crisis that started in 2009.
 The crisis increased unemployment and lower people's incomes.
 If people start to earn lower wages, there may be less demand for expensive organic fruits
 and vegetables.
 On the flip side, if people earn higher wages, there will be more demand for these expensive
 organic products.
 Other shocks can affect and shift aggregate demand as well.
 In recent years, Europe has been experiencing waves of immigration from countries in conflict,
 including Libya and Syria.
 Such waves of immigration would increase the total EU population, which would in turn increase
 the demand for food.
 Thus, it would increase in immigration would shift the demand upward.
 Now let's focus on possible supply shifters.
 If jobs and potential profits in other sectors, such as the technology industry, for example,
 become more enticing, there may be a decrease in the number of farmers who want to work
 in the agricultural industry.
 This would have a negative impact on the supply of agricultural production.
 Or there may be a random supply shock, such as poor weather.
 If there's exceptionally warm weather along with very little rainfall, how might this
 affect supply?
 Most likely, this will lower agricultural production.
 You may recall the recent California drought which lasted several years and greatly impacted
 agricultural production.
 This supply shock significantly decreased orange, avocado, garlic, lettuce, and olive
 production across the state.
 We can view cap as a tool used by EU agricultural policymakers to intervene in the market and
 act as a demand shifter itself.
 Though this is not a standard shifter, the government can effectively act as a consumer
 by buying agricultural products through its buyback schemes.
 This would shift demand upwards.
 By using cap as a demand shifter, the EU can influence the price as a deliberate choice
 to support farmers through higher prices.
 Thus, when EU farmers are unhappy with low prices, policymakers in the EU can make the
 political choice to keep farmers happy and prices stable.
 The EU supports farmers' incomes by using cap as a shifter to distort market equilibrium
 towards higher prices.
 When using cap in this way, consumers pay higher prices and taxpayers fund the shift.
 However, the agricultural market in the EU can have broader implications beyond EU member
 states.
 One outcome of these government subsidies and buyback schemes is that it has led to the
 overproduction of agricultural products.
 Some farmers know that the government will buy any excess products if they can't sell
 the consumers.
 This excess supply has been dumped in other countries, particularly developing countries.
 The agricultural dumping has significant implications for the market of these developing countries.
 For example, cap provides considerable support for European sugar producers which has caused
 overproduction.
 Estimates suggest that approximately 5 million tons of excess EU sugar are dumped on world
 markets each year.
 Consider how this might affect the supply of sugar in Mozambique or Swaziland.
 How does it impact farmers outside of the EU?
 Not only does it significantly increase the supply of sugar in developing countries, but
 it may also decrease the price of sugar in those markets.
