 Now, we will turn our attention to factors that cost shifts in supply.
 As discussed previously, when the price of a good or a surface changes, the quantity supplied
 varies along as a supply curve.
 If something other than price changes, one would expect the quantity supplied would change
 at every price.
 Economists refer to this as a shift in supply.
 For example, in our market for sugar, if a new technology were developed that allowed
 producers to produce sugar at a lower cost, then we might expect a supply to shift.
 The assigned readings discussed several additional factors that might shift supply, including
 changes in the price of production inputs, changes in conditions such as weather, that
 influence production, changes in producers' other employment options, and many others.
 As with demand, another thing that can cost a shift in supply is government policy.
 In the previous video, we showed how to model the EU's agricultural buyback program as
 a shift in demand for the local EU market.
 In this example, we'll consider another feature of the buyback program in which the EU unloads
 excess sugar by selling it in foreign markets.
 In these foreign markets, the arrival of large quantities of excess sugar from the European
 Union can be considered a shift in supply created by the EU's buyback policy.
 Let's imagine that one of the reasons in which excess sugar is sold is in Southern Africa.
 We'll start by graphing the market for sugar in Southern Africa.
 Since we're graphing a different market, we'll use different supply and demand equations
 with the process for graphing the curves and finding equilibrium prices and quantities will
 be unchanged.
 Again, I'll move some up quickly, but check out the previous demonstration videos for
 a refresher.
 As always, the first thing to do is give your graph a descriptive title and label your
 axes.
 This is particularly important now that we've introduced multiple market models.
 Now, let's use the same process as before to graph demand and supply curves.
 Namely, we'll invert the equations where that price is expressed as a function of quantity,
 find the vertical intercepts, use the slope to find additional points, and connect the
 dots.
 We've spread these calculations up in the interest of time.
 And now, let's find the equilibrium quantity and price.
 As before, to find the equilibrium price, we'll set the expression for the quantity
 demanded, equal to the expression for the quantity supplied, and find a new equilibrium
 price.
 Then we'll use the equilibrium price and plug it into one of these two expressions to find
 the equilibrium quantity.
 As before, it shouldn't matter which expression we choose to plug it into at the end.
 So, as you can see, the equilibrium price of sugar in the Southern African market is
 three euros per kilogram, and the equilibrium quantity sold is 30 kilograms.
 Now, let's consider a policy in which the EU government pledges to buy 25 units of sugar
 from European producers as before.
 Let's assume that 10 kilos of the sugar purchased by the EU are consumed within the EU as domestic
 food aid, and let's assume that the EU would reach the sell the remaining 15 kilos of sugar
 in Southern Africa at the prevailing market price in order to mitigate the cost of administering
 the buyback program.
 We can modify the supply equation to reflect the EU's governmental commitment to supplying
 15 kilograms of sugar in the Southern African market regardless of the market price by adding
 15 to the supply equation.
 Now, let's graph this new supply curve on the graph we've already started.
 You can use the same method as before to graph the new supply curve, namely we'll invert the
 supply function so that price expresses the function of quantity supplied, and then we'll
 use the intercepts and the slope to find individual points on the graph and then connect the dots.
 As for the shift in demand that we saw before, this new supply curve has the same slope as
 the original, but it's shifted outward, hence the name shift in supply.
 This occurs because the quantity supplied is 15 units higher than before at every price.
 Let's find the new equilibrium price and quantity after the EU's entrant as a supplier in the
 Southern African sugar market.
 As before, we can find the new equilibrium price by setting the new expression for the
 quantity supplied equal to the expression for quantity demanded.
 We can use that to sell for price, and then get this new price and plug it into the quantity
 demanded or quantity supplied equation to find the new quantities.
 As before, it shouldn't matter which equation we plug it into if we've solved for the price
 correctly.
 And so we can see that the new equilibrium price is 2.4 Euros per kilogram of sugar, and
 the new equilibrium quantity is 39 kilograms of sugar.
 Now that we've graphed the shift in supply and solved for the new equilibrium price and
 quantity, which our label is point B.
 Just think a bit about how the buyback program might impact countries that absorb the excess
 supply from the EU.
 The first thing to notice is that the quantity of sugar traded is higher at the new equilibrium.
 This should not be surprising as the EU's actions increase the supply of sugar drastically
 at every price.
 Interestingly, at the new equilibrium, the quantity of sugar sold is only increased by
 9 kilos, even though the EU government supplied 15 kilos.
 This is because the shift in supply resulted in a price decrease, which caused producers
 from Southern Africa to reduce their supply.
 Some producers from Southern Africa, who's willing to produce a sensitive price, leave
 the market, or decrease their output in response to lower prices that they receive for their
 sugar.
 This partially offsets the increase in supply driven by the arrival of European sugar.
 Our model predicts that, while it supports sugar producers in the EU, caps buyback program
 will reduce production among producers in markets that receive excess sugar and lower
 the prices that they receive for their goods.
 It also highlights that sugar consumers in Southern Africa benefit from lower prices and
 higher levels of sugar consumption.
 In this set of videos, we've explored how to use the supply and demand framework to
 understand and disentangle the various impacts of caps buyback program on multiple markets.
 In discussing the impacts of a policy that seems to help some people and hurt others such
 as this buyback program, what might be interested in quantifying exactly how much consumers and
 producers benefit under a given market equilibrium.
 The next part of these materials introduce the concept of economic surplus, which gets
 that just this idea.
