 Throughout the materials, we'll explore a real-life policy example to show the connections between supply and demand in public policy work.
 You'll see the same policy example as we progress through these modules, and we'll hear from me, fellow HKS faculty members, and Felix Wusu.
 Some of the materials theoretical and abstract, so the policy example is useful for understanding the concepts in a relevant and practical way that is connected to the issues you will come across in your public policy work.
 Our example is the European Union's common agricultural policy, which we will refer to as CAP.
 Some of you may have heard of the infamous Butter Mountains, or Wine Lakes, resulting from agricultural overproduction to the CAP.
 Or maybe you've heard of CAP in the context of agricultural dumping in developing countries, which can hurt local farmers.
 Or maybe this is your first time hearing about CAP.
 We chose this example because the EU's common agricultural policy has broad implications beyond the borders of the European Union.
 CAP is a policy example that can be understood through the framework of microeconomics.
 So, what is CAP? CAP is first introduced in 1962. It's a system of agricultural subsidies paid to EU farmers.
 The EU recognized that food production is inherently vulnerable and uncertain because farming requires heavy investment and is dependent on economic, weather, and health conditions beyond the control of farmers.
 Thus, the aim of CAP is to provide a stable and safe food supply for your 500 million food consumers and ensure a decent standard of living for farmers.
 CAP achieves these goals in part by supporting farmers' incomes to make sure that enough food can be produced throughout the EU.
 CAP supports EU farmers' food system of agricultural subsidies, which amount to more than $60 billion each year.
 When it was first created, CAP supported farmers primarily through a price support scheme.
 A price support scheme is when the government sets guaranteed prices for the crops and agrees to buy anything that the farmers are unable to sell to consumers at that price.
 The government supports gay farmers are guaranteed by her, which created incentives for them to produce and sell as much as possible.
 The resulting increase in production by the excess supplies of agricultural products, and you may have heard stories of massive surpluses of butter and wine and you have that resulted from CAP.
 CAP has undergone several major reforms to avoid such problems.
 For example, now governments are getting direct payments to farmers' of the form of basic income that's decoupled from production.
 In our example, however, we will focus on CAP's initial price support schemes involving government buyback programs and how it influenced markets for agricultural goods.
 The CAP example will be the basis to model the market for when agricultural products sugar and demonstrations in these models.
 This example will help demonstrate how economic market can be used to understand and possibly predict the impacts of policies set as CAP on markets.
 This policy example is interesting, but also has limitations.
 Even though we are only exploring the EU's agricultural policy, we recognize that it is much broader and important implications.
 What happens in the EU affects agricultural markets of other countries.
 And this example also offers wider applicability.
 Many other countries also adopt similar agricultural policies.
 The United States currently pays around $20 billion per year to farmers' indirect subsidies, including heavy subsidies on corn and soybeans in Iowa.
 Norway currently pays the highest agricultural subsidies to farmers, followed by Switzerland and Japan.
 Even if you're not familiar with EU or interested in agricultural policy, this example will help build your understanding, your skills, and your intuition about demand and supply and equilibrium, which you can apply in other intersections of markets and public policy.
