 Now that you've read about the basic intuition behind the laws of demand and supply,
 let's work on modeling the market for sugar in a region of the European Union using equations as well as with a graph.
 First, we'll focus on interpreting and graphing demand for sugar.
 As noted in the assigned readings from the previous section,
 the demand curve characterizes the relationship between the quantity of a good or service that is demanded and its price.
 Here is an example of a demand curve that might characterize the quantity of sugar that is demanded in the EU.
 Here we have Q(d) is the quantity of sugar demanded and P is the price per kilogram of sugar.
 Looking at this demand equation, the first thing you should know is the negative relationship between
 price and the quantity demanded. We know from the law of demand that all else being equal,
 you expect the quantity demanded to decrease as the price of a good increases and the negative coefficient
 on the P in the demand equation, the list makes that concept.
 We can further illustrate this by simply plugging in a few prices to the demand equation in the table that I set up
 and seeing how the corresponding quantity demanded changes as a result.
 So first, I'll plug in the price of one euro.
 And if you were to plug one in for P here, you'll see that the quantity demanded is going to be 50 minus 10 or 40,
 which means that 40 kilograms of sugar are demanded at the price of one euro.
 But the price would increase the two euros per kilogram.
 If you plug in the price of two to the demand equation and see that the quantity demanded
 is now 50 minus 10 times two or 50 minus 20, which is 30 kilogram of sugar.
 But this is reflected in the demand equation by the negative 10 coefficient on price.
 When we increase the price by one, the quantity demanded decreases by 10.
 And we continue doing this for a price of three, four, five, and so on.
 And see that as the price increases by one euro per kilogram, the quantity demanded always falls by 10 kilograms.
 This kind of table is referred to as a demand schedule.
 Now that we've established how the demand equation reflects the law of demand,
 let's go on to graphing the demand curve.
 The first thing you should always do when graphing supply and demand in the market
 is to give your graph a title and label your axes.
 In economics, we always graph quantity on the horizontal axis.
 And we always put price on the vertical axis.
 The horizontal axis is sometimes referred to as the x-axis.
 And the vertical axis is sometimes referred to as the y-axis.
 If you've done a lot of graphing in other field disciplines,
 you might have noticed that I've labeled the axes the reverse of what you might expect
 based on how the demand equation is written.
 In the demand equation provided for this example, quantity is a dependent variable
 as in its model as a function of price.
 And price is the independent variable.
 This is great for illustrating the law of demand and quickly determining
 how the quantity demanded changes in response to a price change
 as we just illustrated with the demand schedule.
 But this format is not particularly intuitive for graphing on our axes.
 If the language dependent independent variables is not familiar to you,
 don't worry.
 You don't need to understand that terminology moving forward,
 but it can be helpful if you do.
 The main thing to remember is that when given a demand equation where quantity
 is written as a function of price,
 you will need to invert the demand function.
 So that the price is expressed as a function of quantity instead.
 Our goal in inverting the demand function is to get it in a slope intercept form,
 which you may recall from a basic math course in your past.
 This format allows to quickly and intuitively graph the demand function
 on the axes that we have drawn.
 So, as I mentioned, our goal is to make it so that
 price is expressed as a function of quantity.
 So the first thing I'll do is add 10p to both sides.
 Next, I'll subtract Qd from both sides.
 And then finally, I'll divide both sides by 10.
 And now we have the demand equation above expressed with price as a function of quantity.
 Make sure to note that both the original and the inverted equations
 characterize the same relationship,
 and the algebra is mostly to make things more intuitive to graph.
 Now that we've inverted the function, let's work on graphing it.
 As I mentioned before, the equation is now in slope intercept form.
 So the first thing that we'll do is we're going to find the vertical intercept.
 The vertical intercept is the point at which the line intersects the vertical axis or the y axis.
 To find this point, plug zero in for quantity demanded in the inverting equation and solve for p.
 In this case, if you plug zero in for quantity demanded, we'll see that price is equal to 5.
 And that is going to be the vertical intercept.
 Intuitively, this is the price that the first producer and the mark would be able to charge.
 Now that we have one point on the line, there are two approaches we can take for drawing the best of it.
 The first approach is to use the slope to find additional points on the line and connect them.
 The slope represents how steep a line is and represents the ratio of rise over run
 for how much the line moves horizontally for a given vertical change.
 So our slope in this equation is represented by the second term
 and it's negative one tenth which is the coefficient on quantity demanded.
 That tells us that if the price were to decrease by one or negative one,
 we can expect an increase of 10 in the quantity demanded, hence the negative one over tensile.
 So if the price were to decrease by one from five to four, we can expect an increase
 in the horizontal direction of 10 kilograms of sugar.
 And so our next point will be here at the intersection of four and 10.
 I can do this again for the next point starting from here, if the price were to decrease by one from four to three,
 we would expect a horizontal increase of 10 again.
 And so the next point will be here at a price of three and a quantity of 20.
 And we continue doing this and eventually get the whole line and eventually connect the dots.
 The second approach is to find the horizontal intersect of the line
 or across the horizontal with x axis.
 Intuitively, this is the quantity that will be demanded in this region with the price of sugar
 where zero euros per kilo.
 This is actually easier to do in the original formulation of the demand function
 where the quantity is expressed as a function of price.
 If we're to plug zero euros in for the price, the second term drops out
 and we see the quantity demanded is 50.
 Once we've plotted the vertical and horizontal intercepts,
 we can connect them and we should get the same demand curve as we did when used in slow method.
 Also note that the scale of the horizontal axis and the vertical axis are different.
 In the horizontal axis, each block represents 10 units of sugar or 10 kilograms of sugar.
 In the vertical axis, each block represents an increase of one euro per kilogram in the price of sugar.
 Now we've read the demand curve.
 Let's take a few moments to link what we've just done back to the intuition we got from the law of demand.
 The demand curve is downward slowly, which indicates that the quantity demanded increases as the price decreases.
 This is exactly the relationship that's positive in the law of demand.
 All else being equal, people are typically less willing and able to buy sugar when it's more expensive.
 In this video, we explored the concept of demand.
 Using the example of the market for sugar in the EU,
 we highlighted how the demand function can be a mathematical representation of the law of demand,
 which characterizes the intuitive relationship between the quantity of a good or service that's
 demanded at its price.
 We then learned how to use the demand function to determine the quantity demanded at a given price.
 Finally, we learned how to graph a demand curve from a given demand function by inverting the function
 to solve the price as a function of quantity demanded,
 finding the vertical horizontal intercepts and the slope,
 and using the slope and intercepts to graph the line.
 Next, we'll move on exploring the concept of supply.
 We'll build on the example we started here,
 and many of the tools and tricks you've covered in this video
 will apply when interpreting a graph on supply as well.
 So being comfortable with the material from this video will be very helpful as we move forward.
