 Now that we've explored the concept of consumer demand, let's shift our focus to
 how producers supply goods and services. We'll build out the example market for
 sugar that we began developing in the previous video and work on modeling
 supply of sugar using equations as well as with the graph. As nobody has signed
 readings in the previous section, the supply curve characterized the relationship
 between the quantity of a good or a service that is supplied and expressed.
 Here's an example of a supply curve that might characterize the quantity of sugar
 that is produced for sale in a region of the EU. Here QS is the quantity of sugar
 that's supplied and as before P is the price per kilo of sugar. Looking at the
 supply equation, the first thing you should notice is the positive relationship
 between price and the quantity supplied. We know from the law of supply that all
 is being equal, we expect the quantity supplied to increase as the price of a
 good increases and this positive coefficient on P in this equation illustrates that concept.
 We can also illustrate this concept by creating a supply schedule using the same
 approach we did for creating a demand schedule. First we can plug in a price of
 one euro to the quantity supplied equation and see that at a price of
 one euro per kilogram of sugar, 15 kilograms of sugar are supplied. When the price
 increases to two euros per kilogram of sugar, 15 more kilograms of sugar are supplied
 and we can see that by plugging two in this supply equation and seeing that the
 quantity supplied becomes 15 times two, which is 30. We can continue to do this
 process for additional price as well and see if the quantity supplied increases by
 15 every time the price increases by one euro.
 Now that we've established the link between our supply equation and the law of supply,
 let's avoid a graphing the supply curve. The process for graphing the supply curve
 is nearly identical to that for graphing demand. The stuff to the same and the
 only thing that changes is that now we use the equation for the supply curve rather
 than the equation for the demand curve. The supply equation is also written with
 quantity expressed as a function of price and so we'll need to invert the supply
 function for the price expressed as a function of quantity. The first thing I'll
 do is simply switch sides of the equation so that price is not left as a personal
 preference thing and then I'll divide both sides by 15 and now we have price
 expressed as a function of quantity supplied instead. Now that we've inverted our supply
 function, let's work on actually graphing it. As before, the first thing you always do
 is to give a graph a descriptive title and label your axes and at the
 fourth end of the time is we always graph quantity on the horizontal axis, also
 called the x axis and we graph price on the variable axis or also called the y axis.
 So like we did before, let's start by finding a vertical intercept. The vertical intercept is the
 point at which the y axis is the vertical axis. To find that point, let's plug in
 zero for quantity supplied in our inverted supply equation and solve for P. In this
 case, it's quite simply if you plug in zero for quantity supplied, the price is just zero.
 Let me find it. Intuitively, this is the price at which no producer would enter the
 market begins a line sugar. In this example, at any price higher than zero
 euros per kilo sugar, some producers would enter the market and the quantity
 supplied to be positive. Now that we have one point on the line, we can use the
 slope to find additional points on the line and connect them. In this case, the
 slope is positive and it is 1 over 15, which is the coefficient of the quantity
 supplied. As before, as I said, if the price were to increase by one euro per kilogram of
 sugar, we can expect that the quantity supplied to increase by 15 and so the
 next player line will be at one euro and 15 kilogram of sugar supplied. We can use
 the same process to find additional points on this line. So if the price were to
 further increase the two euros, then we expect the quantity supplied to increase
 by 15 again to 30. Now we have a couple of points. We can connect them and get the
 entire supply curve. Now that we've graphed the supply curve, let's take a few
 minutes to link what we've just done back to the end to which we got for the law
 of supply. The supply curve is upward-solving, which indicates that the quantity supplied
 should increase as the price increases. This is exactly the relationship that's
 positive in the law of supply. All else being equal, produced or typically more
 willing and able to supply sugar when the price they receive for it is higher. In
 this video, we've explored the concept of supply. Building on the example of the
 market for sugar, we highlighted how supply and demand functions can be used to
 illustrate the laws of demand and supply and understand how the quantity of a
 good or service that is demand is supplied varies with its price. Finally, we
 learned how to graph supply and demand curves. Next, we'll build on this example.
 We started here and create understanding how the laws of supply and demand interact
 to determine the prices we actually see in the marketplace.
