 Now that we've explored demand and supplies separately, let's focus on how they interact.
 We'll build on the example market for sugar in a region of the EU that we began developing
 in the previous videos, and work on modeling the supply and demand of sugar together.
 We'll learn how to graph supply and demand together, and how to use the supply and demand
 equations to solve for equilibrium price and quantity. We've already learned how to graph supply
 and demand curves separately. To understand market equilibrium, we will need to conserve
 both supply and demand at the same time. For that end, let's graph supply and demand equations
 that we've been using on the same axes. As always, the first thing to do is give your
 graphics with the title and make your axes. And then we always graph with quantity on the
 x-axis and price on the y-axis. I'll start with graphing demand first and use the same
 process before to graph it. Namely, I'm going to invert the equations when the price is
 expressed as a quantity.
 Then I'll find the vertical intercept, and then I'll use the slope to find a digital
 point on the line and connect the dots.
 I went through this a little faster than before, so if you'd like more detail,
 make sure to check out the video and graphing demand. Now let's graph the supply curve using
 the same set of axes that we've drawn here. Again, using the process we've discussed in
 the supply video, we'll invert the equation and solve for price as a function of quantity,
 and find the vertical intercept, and then use the slope to find digital points.
 Now we have a graph that shows both the supply and the demand for sugar.
 The supply and the demand curve intersect at the point that I'll label today.
 This is the point at which the quantity demanded and the quantity supplied are equal.
 Markets where the quantity demanded by consumers and supply by producers are the same are said
 to be in equilibrium. As you already read, markets that are in equilibrium tend to stay in equilibrium,
 and markets that are non-equilibrium face economic pressures to move towards equilibrium.
 That being said, there are several reasons why policymakers may want to intervene in a market
 to move price and quantities away from their equilibrium values. We'll get into some of these
 reasons in some of the videos. Drawing the supply and demand curve on the same axes has given us
 a profit sense of the equilibrium price and the equilibrium quantity in the market for sugar.
 If you're like me and sometimes struggle to draw perfectly straight lines, drawing a graph
 can be a somewhat imprecise way of identifying the equilibrium price and quantity on market.
 Luckily, we can use the supply and the demand equations to solve for the exact equilibrium
 price and quantity. I've prepared the word for it for us to solve for the equilibrium price.
 To find the equilibrium price of sugar, we want to identify the price at which the quantity demanded
 is equal to the quantity supplied. Luckily, we have equations that express both the quantity
 demanded and the quantity supplied as a function of price. To find the price at which quantity
 demanded is equal to the quantity supplied, we quite literally set the quantity demanded
 equation equal to the quantity supplied equation and solved for P. So we want to set the quantity
 supplied equation, which is 15P equal to the quantity demanded equation, which is 50 minus 10P,
 and then solved for P, which I'll do first by adding 10P on both sides, and then dividing by 25.
 So the equilibrium price for sugar in this market is two euros per kilogram of sugar.
 Now we have the equilibrium price. We can also solve for the equilibrium quantity by
 plugging the equilibrium price of two euros per kilogram into the supply or the demand equation.
 If we correctly solve for the equilibrium price, it won't matter which equation we choose. I'll choose
 the supply equation because it's half of your term instead. But as you can see, using the
 demand equation should yield the same as all. So now we have the equilibrium quantity as well,
 which is 30 kilogram of sugar. I personally always plug the equilibrium price into both the supply
 and the demand equation. It's a great way to check that I solved for the equilibrium price correctly,
 but checking out the price that we found leads to the same quantity demanded and quantity supplied
 also helps to reinforce my intuition about why the equilibrium price is important in the first place,
 mainly that leads to the same quantity supplied and quantity demanded. In this set of videos,
 we explore the concept of supply and demand separately and consider how price influences
 the quantity of a good or service that is demanded and supplied. We translate the intuition of a
 loss of supply and demand in equations, and using the example of the market for sugar in a reach
 of the EU, learn how to graph supply and demand curves and identify the equilibrium price and
 quantity. Next, we'll consider factors other than price that can influence supply and demand,
 and use a framework that we develop to learn how to model changes in these other factors.
