3.5 | Demand, Supply, and Efficiency
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Contrast consumer surplus, producer surplus, and social surplus
• Explain why price floors and price ceilings can be inefficient
• Analyze demand and supply as a social adjustment mechanism
The familiar demand and supply diagram holds within it the concept of economic efficiency. One typical way that
economists define efficiency is when it is impossible to improve the situation of one party without imposing a cost
on another. Conversely, if a situation is inefficient, it becomes possible to benefit at least one party without imposing
costs on others.
Efficiency in the demand and supply model has the same basic meaning: The economy is getting as much benefit
as possible from its scarce resources and all the possible gains from trade have been achieved. In other words, the
optimal amount of each good and service is being produced and consumed.

Consumer Surplus, Producer Surplus, Social Surplus
Consider a market for tablet computers, as shown in Figure 3.23. The equilibrium price is $80 and the equilibrium
quantity is 28 million. To see the benefits to consumers, look at the segment of the demand curve above the
equilibrium point and to the left. This portion of the demand curve shows that at least some demanders would have
been willing to pay more than $80 for a tablet.
For example, point J shows that if the price was $90, 20 million tablets would be sold. Those consumers who would
have been willing to pay $90 for a tablet based on the utility they expect to receive from it, but who were able to pay
the equilibrium price of $80, clearly received a benefit beyond what they had to pay for. Remember, the demand curve
traces consumers’ willingness to pay for different quantities. The amount that individuals would have been willing
to pay, minus the amount that they actually paid, is called consumer surplus. Consumer surplus is the area labeled
F—that is, the area above the market price and below the demand curve.
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col11627/1.10

70

Chapter 3 | Demand and Supply

Figure 3.23 Consumer and Producer Surplus The somewhat triangular area labeled by F shows the area of
consumer surplus, which shows that the equilibrium price in the market was less than what many of the consumers
were willing to pay. Point J on the demand curve shows that, even at the price of $90, consumers would have been
willing to purchase a quantity of 20 million. The somewhat triangular area labeled by G shows the area of producer
surplus, which shows that the equilibrium price received in the market was more than what many of the producers
were willing to accept for their products. For example, point K on the supply curve shows that at a price of $45, firms
would have been willing to supply a quantity of 14 million.

The supply curve shows the quantity that firms are willing to supply at each price. For example, point K in Figure
3.23 illustrates that, at $45, firms would still have been willing to supply a quantity of 14 million. Those producers
who would have been willing to supply the tablets at $45, but who were instead able to charge the equilibrium price
of $80, clearly received an extra benefit beyond what they required to supply the product. The amount that a seller
is paid for a good minus the seller’s actual cost is called producer surplus. In Figure 3.23, producer surplus is the
area labeled G—that is, the area between the market price and the segment of the supply curve below the equilibrium.
The sum of consumer surplus and producer surplus is social surplus, also referred to as economic surplus or total
surplus. In Figure 3.23, social surplus would be shown as the area F + G. Social surplus is larger at equilibrium
quantity and price than it would be at any other quantity. This demonstrates the economic efficiency of the market
equilibrium. In addition, at the efficient level of output, it is impossible to produce greater consumer surplus without
reducing producer surplus, and it is impossible to produce greater producer surplus without reducing consumer
surplus.

Demand and Supply as a Social Adjustment Mechanism
The demand and supply model emphasizes that prices are not set only by demand or only by supply, but by the
interaction between the two. In 1890, the famous economist Alfred Marshall wrote that asking whether supply or
demand determined a price was like arguing “whether it is the upper or the under blade of a pair of scissors that cuts
a piece of paper.” The answer is that both blades of the demand and supply scissors are always involved.
The adjustments of equilibrium price and quantity in a market-oriented economy often occur without much
government direction or oversight. If the coffee crop in Brazil suffers a terrible frost, then the supply curve of coffee
shifts to the left and the price of coffee rises. Some people—call them the coffee addicts—continue to drink coffee
and pay the higher price. Others switch to tea or soft drinks. No government commission is needed to figure out how
to adjust coffee prices, which companies will be allowed to process the remaining supply, which supermarkets in
which cities will get how much coffee to sell, or which consumers will ultimately be allowed to drink the brew. Such

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col11627/1.10

Chapter 3 | Demand and Supply

71

adjustments in response to price changes happen all the time in a market economy, often so smoothly and rapidly that
we barely notice them.
Think for a moment of all the seasonal foods that are available and inexpensive at certain times of the year, like fresh
corn in midsummer, but more expensive at other times of the year. People alter their diets and restaurants alter their
menus in response to these fluctuations in prices without fuss or fanfare. For both the U.S. economy and the world
economy as a whole, markets—that is, demand and supply—are the primary social mechanism for answering the
basic questions about what is produced, how it is produced, and for whom it is produced.

Why Can We Not Get Enough of Organic?
Organic food is grown without synthetic pesticides, chemical fertilizers or genetically modified seeds. In
recent decades, the demand for organic products has increased dramatically. The Organic Trade Association
reported sales increased from $1 billion in 1990 to $35.1 billion in 2013, more than 90% of which were sales
of food products.
Why, then, are organic foods more expensive than their conventional counterparts? The answer is a clear
application of the theories of supply and demand. As people have learned more about the harmful effects of
chemical fertilizers, growth hormones, pesticides and the like from large-scale factory farming, our tastes and
preferences for safer, organic foods have increased. This change in tastes has been reinforced by increases
in income, which allow people to purchase pricier products, and has made organic foods more mainstream.
This has led to an increased demand for organic foods. Graphically, the demand curve has shifted right, and
we have moved up the supply curve as producers have responded to the higher prices by supplying a greater
quantity.
In addition to the movement along the supply curve, we have also had an increase in the number of farmers
converting to organic farming over time. This is represented by a shift to the right of the supply curve.
Since both demand and supply have shifted to the right, the resulting equilibrium quantity of organic foods
is definitely higher, but the price will only fall when the increase in supply is larger than the increase in
demand. We may need more time before we see lower prices in organic foods. Since the production costs of
these foods may remain higher than conventional farming, because organic fertilizers and pest management
techniques are more expensive, they may never fully catch up with the lower prices of non-organic foods.
As a final, specific example: The Environmental Working Group’s “Dirty Dozen” list of fruits and vegetables,
which test high for pesticide residue even after washing, was released in April 2013. The inclusion of
strawberries on the list has led to an increase in demand for organic strawberries, resulting in both a higher
equilibrium price and quantity of sales.

