3.2 | Shifts in Demand and Supply for Goods and
Services
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Identify factors that affect demand
• Graph demand curves and demand shifts
• Identify factors that affect supply
• Graph supply curves and supply shifts
The previous module explored how price affects the quantity demanded and the quantity supplied. The result was the
demand curve and the supply curve. Price, however, is not the only thing that influences demand. Nor is it the only
thing that influences supply. For example, how is demand for vegetarian food affected if, say, health concerns cause
more consumers to avoid eating meat? Or how is the supply of diamonds affected if diamond producers discover
several new diamond mines? What are the major factors, in addition to the price, that influence demand or supply?

50

Chapter 3 | Demand and Supply

What Factors Affect Demand?
We defined demand as the amount of some product a consumer is willing and able to purchase at each price. That
suggests at least two factors in addition to price that affect demand. Willingness to purchase suggests a desire, based
on what economists call tastes and preferences. If you neither need nor want something, you will not buy it. Ability
to purchase suggests that income is important. Professors are usually able to afford better housing and transportation
than students, because they have more income. Prices of related goods can affect demand also. If you need a new
car, the price of a Honda may affect your demand for a Ford. Finally, the size or composition of the population can
affect demand. The more children a family has, the greater their demand for clothing. The more driving-age children
a family has, the greater their demand for car insurance, and the less for diapers and baby formula.
These factors matter both for demand by an individual and demand by the market as a whole. Exactly how do these
various factors affect demand, and how do we show the effects graphically? To answer those questions, we need the
ceteris paribus assumption.

The Ceteris Paribus Assumption
A demand curve or a supply curve is a relationship between two, and only two, variables: quantity on the horizontal
axis and price on the vertical axis. The assumption behind a demand curve or a supply curve is that no relevant
economic factors, other than the product’s price, are changing. Economists call this assumption ceteris paribus, a
Latin phrase meaning “other things being equal.” Any given demand or supply curve is based on the ceteris paribus
assumption that all else is held equal. A demand curve or a supply curve is a relationship between two, and only two,
variables when all other variables are kept constant. If all else is not held equal, then the laws of supply and demand
will not necessarily hold, as the following Clear It Up feature shows.

When does ceteris paribus apply?
Ceteris paribus is typically applied when we look at how changes in price affect demand or supply, but ceteris
paribus can be applied more generally. In the real world, demand and supply depend on more factors than just
price. For example, a consumer’s demand depends on income and a producer’s supply depends on the cost
of producing the product. How can we analyze the effect on demand or supply if multiple factors are changing
at the same time—say price rises and income falls? The answer is that we examine the changes one at a
time, assuming the other factors are held constant.
For example, we can say that an increase in the price reduces the amount consumers will buy (assuming
income, and anything else that affects demand, is unchanged). Additionally, a decrease in income reduces the
amount consumers can afford to buy (assuming price, and anything else that affects demand, is unchanged).
This is what the ceteris paribus assumption really means. In this particular case, after we analyze each factor
separately, we can combine the results. The amount consumers buy falls for two reasons: first because of the
higher price and second because of the lower income.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col11627/1.10

Chapter 3 | Demand and Supply

51

How Does Income Affect Demand?
Let’s use income as an example of how factors other than price affect demand. Figure 3.5 shows the initial demand
for automobiles as D0. At point Q, for example, if the price is $20,000 per car, the quantity of cars demanded is 18
million. D0 also shows how the quantity of cars demanded would change as a result of a higher or lower price. For
example, if the price of a car rose to $22,000, the quantity demanded would decrease to 17 million, at point R.
The original demand curve D0, like every demand curve, is based on the ceteris paribus assumption that no other
economically relevant factors change. Now imagine that the economy expands in a way that raises the incomes of
many people, making cars more affordable. How will this affect demand? How can we show this graphically?
Return to Figure 3.5. The price of cars is still $20,000, but with higher incomes, the quantity demanded has now
increased to 20 million cars, shown at point S. As a result of the higher income levels, the demand curve shifts to
the right to the new demand curve D1, indicating an increase in demand. Table 3.4 shows clearly that this increased
demand would occur at every price, not just the original one.

Figure 3.5 Shifts in Demand: A Car Example Increased demand means that at every given price, the quantity
demanded is higher, so that the demand curve shifts to the right from D0 to D1. Decreased demand means that at
every given price, the quantity demanded is lower, so that the demand curve shifts to the left from D0 to D2.

Price

Decrease to D2

Original Quantity Demanded D0

Increase to D1

$16,000

17.6 million

22.0 million

24.0 million

$18,000

16.0 million

20.0 million

22.0 million

$20,000

14.4 million

18.0 million

20.0 million

$22,000

13.6 million

17.0 million

19.0 million

$24,000

13.2 million

16.5 million

18.5 million

$26,000

12.8 million

16.0 million

18.0 million

Table 3.4 Price and Demand Shifts: A Car Example

Now, imagine that the economy slows down so that many people lose their jobs or work fewer hours, reducing their
incomes. In this case, the decrease in income would lead to a lower quantity of cars demanded at every given price,
and the original demand curve D0 would shift left to D2. The shift from D0 to D2 represents such a decrease in

52

Chapter 3 | Demand and Supply

demand: At any given price level, the quantity demanded is now lower. In this example, a price of $20,000 means 18
million cars sold along the original demand curve, but only 14.4 million sold after demand fell.
When a demand curve shifts, it does not mean that the quantity demanded by every individual buyer changes by the
same amount. In this example, not everyone would have higher or lower income and not everyone would buy or not
buy an additional car. Instead, a shift in a demand curve captures a pattern for the market as a whole.
In this section, we argued that higher income causes greater demand at every price. This is true for most goods and
services. For some—luxury cars, vacations in Europe, and fine jewelry—the effect of a rise in income can be
especially pronounced. A product whose demand rises when income rises, and vice versa, is called a normal good. A
few exceptions to this pattern do exist. As incomes rise, many people will buy fewer generic brand groceries and
more name brand groceries. They are less likely to buy used cars and more likely to buy new cars. They will be less
likely to rent an apartment and more likely to own a home, and so on. A product whose demand falls when income
rises, and vice versa, is called an inferior good. In other words, when income increases, the demand curve shifts to
the left.

Other Factors That Shift Demand Curves
Income is not the only factor that causes a shift in demand. Other things that change demand include tastes and
preferences, the composition or size of the population, the prices of related goods, and even expectations. A change
in any one of the underlying factors that determine what quantity people are willing to buy at a given price will cause
a shift in demand. Graphically, the new demand curve lies either to the right (an increase) or to the left (a decrease)
of the original demand curve. Let’s look at these factors.
Changing Tastes or Preferences
From 1980 to 2014, the per-person consumption of chicken by Americans rose from 48 pounds per year to 85
pounds per year, and consumption of beef fell from 77 pounds per year to 54 pounds per year, according to the U.S.
Department of Agriculture (USDA). Changes like these are largely due to movements in taste, which change the
quantity of a good demanded at every price: that is, they shift the demand curve for that good, rightward for chicken
and leftward for beef.
Changes in the Composition of the Population
The proportion of elderly citizens in the United States population is rising. It rose from 9.8% in 1970 to 12.6% in
2000, and will be a projected (by the U.S. Census Bureau) 20% of the population by 2030. A society with relatively
more children, like the United States in the 1960s, will have greater demand for goods and services like tricycles and
day care facilities. A society with relatively more elderly persons, as the United States is projected to have by 2030,
has a higher demand for nursing homes and hearing aids. Similarly, changes in the size of the population can affect the
demand for housing and many other goods. Each of these changes in demand will be shown as a shift in the demand
curve.
The demand for a product can also be affected by changes in the prices of related goods such as substitutes or
complements. A substitute is a good or service that can be used in place of another good or service. As electronic
books, like this one, become more available, you would expect to see a decrease in demand for traditional printed
books. A lower price for a substitute decreases demand for the other product. For example, in recent years as the price
of tablet computers has fallen, the quantity demanded has increased (because of the law of demand). Since people are
purchasing tablets, there has been a decrease in demand for laptops, which can be shown graphically as a leftward
shift in the demand curve for laptops. A higher price for a substitute good has the reverse effect.
Other goods are complements for each other, meaning that the goods are often used together, because consumption
of one good tends to enhance consumption of the other. Examples include breakfast cereal and milk; notebooks and
pens or pencils; golf balls and golf clubs; gasoline and sport utility vehicles; and the five-way combination of bacon,
lettuce, tomato, mayonnaise, and bread. If the price of golf clubs rises, since the quantity demanded of golf clubs falls
(because of the law of demand), demand for a complement good like golf balls decreases, too. Similarly, a higher
price for skis would shift the demand curve for a complement good like ski resort trips to the left, while a lower price
for a complement has the reverse effect.
Changes in Expectations about Future Prices or Other Factors that Affect Demand
While it is clear that the price of a good affects the quantity demanded, it is also true that expectations about the future
price (or expectations about tastes and preferences, income, and so on) can affect demand. For example, if people
hear that a hurricane is coming, they may rush to the store to buy flashlight batteries and bottled water. If people learn

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col11627/1.10

Chapter 3 | Demand and Supply

53

that the price of a good like coffee is likely to rise in the future, they may head for the store to stock up on coffee
now. These changes in demand are shown as shifts in the curve. Therefore, a shift in demand happens when a change
in some economic factor (other than price) causes a different quantity to be demanded at every price. The following
Work It Out feature shows how this happens.

Shift in Demand
A shift in demand means that at any price (and at every price), the quantity demanded will be different than it
was before. Following is an example of a shift in demand due to an income increase.
Step 1. Draw the graph of a demand curve for a normal good like pizza. Pick a price (like P0). Identify the
corresponding Q0. An example is shown in Figure 3.6.

Figure 3.6 Demand Curve The demand curve can be used to identify how much consumers would buy at
any given price.
Step 2. Suppose income increases. As a result of the change, are consumers going to buy more or less
pizza? The answer is more. Draw a dotted horizontal line from the chosen price, through the original quantity
demanded, to the new point with the new Q1. Draw a dotted vertical line down to the horizontal axis and label
the new Q1. An example is provided in Figure 3.7.

Figure 3.7 Demand Curve with Income Increase With an increase in income, consumers will purchase
larger quantities, pushing demand to the right.
Step 3. Now, shift the curve through the new point. You will see that an increase in income causes an upward
(or rightward) shift in the demand curve, so that at any price the quantities demanded will be higher, as shown
in Figure 3.8.

54

Chapter 3 | Demand and Supply

Figure 3.8 Demand Curve Shifted Right With an increase in income, consumers will purchase larger
quantities, pushing demand to the right, and causing the demand curve to shift right.

Summing Up Factors That Change Demand
Six factors that can shift demand curves are summarized in Figure 3.9. The direction of the arrows indicates whether
the demand curve shifts represent an increase in demand or a decrease in demand. Notice that a change in the price of
the good or service itself is not listed among the factors that can shift a demand curve. A change in the price of a good
or service causes a movement along a specific demand curve, and it typically leads to some change in the quantity
demanded, but it does not shift the demand curve.

Figure 3.9 Factors That Shift Demand Curves (a) A list of factors that can cause an increase in demand from D0
to D1. (b) The same factors, if their direction is reversed, can cause a decrease in demand from D0 to D1.

When a demand curve shifts, it will then intersect with a given supply curve at a different equilibrium price
and quantity. We are, however, getting ahead of our story. Before discussing how changes in demand can affect
equilibrium price and quantity, we first need to discuss shifts in supply curves.

How Production Costs Affect Supply
A supply curve shows how quantity supplied will change as the price rises and falls, assuming ceteris paribus so that
no other economically relevant factors are changing. If other factors relevant to supply do change, then the entire
supply curve will shift. Just as a shift in demand is represented by a change in the quantity demanded at every price,
a shift in supply means a change in the quantity supplied at every price.
In thinking about the factors that affect supply, remember what motivates firms: profits, which are the difference
between revenues and costs. Goods and services are produced using combinations of labor, materials, and machinery,
or what we call inputs or factors of production. If a firm faces lower costs of production, while the prices for the
good or service the firm produces remain unchanged, a firm’s profits go up for the units it was already producing.
Furthermore, it may decide to produce additional units. For example, if there were units before which cost more to
produce than the firm would gain (in revenue) from selling them, then the firm would initially choose not to sell
those units. However with the decrease in input costs, the cost to produce these units may now fall to below the price
and the firm could earn profits by making and selling these additional units. So, when costs of production fall,
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col11627/1.10

Chapter 3 | Demand and Supply

55

a firm will tend to supply a larger quantity at any given price for its output. This can be shown by the supply curve
shifting to the right.
Take, for example, a messenger company that delivers packages around a city. The company may find that buying
gasoline is one of its main costs. If the price of gasoline falls, then the company will find it can deliver messages more
cheaply than before. Some messages that were not profitable to deliver before can now earn the company a profit if
the new cost is less than the price. For example, given the lower gasoline prices, the company can now serve a greater
area, and increase its supply.
Conversely, if a firm faces higher costs of production, then it will earn lower profits at any given selling price for its
products. Furthermore, the firm may reduce production as it ceases to produce units for which the new higher cost
of production exceeds the market price. As a result, a higher cost of production typically causes a firm to supply a
smaller quantity at any given price. In this case, the supply curve shifts to the left.
Consider the supply for cars, shown by curve S0 in Figure 3.10. Point J indicates that if the price is $20,000, the
quantity supplied will be 18 million cars. If the price rises to $22,000 per car, ceteris paribus, the quantity supplied
will rise to 20 million cars, as point K on the S0 curve shows. The same information can be shown in table form, as in
Table 3.5.

Figure 3.10 Shifts in Supply: A Car Example Decreased supply means that at every given price, the quantity
supplied is lower, so that the supply curve shifts to the left, from S0 to S1. Increased supply means that at every given
price, the quantity supplied is higher, so that the supply curve shifts to the right, from S0 to S2.

Price

Decrease to S1

Original Quantity Supplied S0

Increase to S2

$16,000

10.5 million

12.0 million

13.2 million

$18,000

13.5 million

15.0 million

16.5 million

$20,000

16.5 million

18.0 million

19.8 million

$22,000

18.5 million

20.0 million

22.0 million

$24,000

19.5 million

21.0 million

23.1 million

$26,000

20.5 million

22.0 million

24.2 million

Table 3.5 Price and Shifts in Supply: A Car Example

Now, imagine that the price of steel, an important ingredient in manufacturing cars, rises, so that producing a car
has become more expensive. At any given price for selling cars, car manufacturers will react by supplying a lower

56

Chapter 3 | Demand and Supply

quantity. This can be shown graphically as a leftward shift of supply, from S0 to S1, which indicates that at any given
price, the quantity supplied decreases. In this example, at a price of $20,000, the quantity supplied decreases from 18
million on the original supply curve (S0) to 16.5 million on the supply curve S1, which is labeled as point L.
Conversely, if the price of steel decreases, producing a car becomes less expensive. Producers may now find that
additional cars, which used not to be worth producing because of the cost, can be produced at a profit, thanks to the
lower costs. The shift of supply to the right, from S0 to S2, means that at all prices, the quantity supplied has
increased. In this example, at a price of $20,000, the quantity supplied increases from 18 million on the original
supply curve (S0) to 19.8 million on the supply curve S2, which is labeled M.

Other Factors That Affect Supply
In the example above, we saw that changes in the prices of inputs in the production process will affect the cost of
production and thus the supply. Several other things affect the cost of production, too, such as changes in weather or
other natural conditions, new technologies for production, and some government policies.
The cost of production for many agricultural products will be affected by changes in natural conditions. For example,
in 2014 the Manchurian Plain in Northeastern China, which produces most of the country's wheat, corn, and soybeans,
experienced its most severe drought in 50 years. A drought decreases the supply of agricultural products, which means
that at any given price, a lower quantity will be supplied; conversely, especially good weather would shift the supply
curve to the right.
When a firm discovers a new technology that allows the firm to produce at a lower cost, the supply curve will shift
to the right, as well. For instance, in the 1960s a major scientific effort nicknamed the Green Revolution focused on
breeding improved seeds for basic crops like wheat and rice. By the early 1990s, more than two-thirds of the wheat
and rice in low-income countries around the world was grown with these Green Revolution seeds—and the harvest
was twice as high per acre. A technological improvement that reduces costs of production will shift supply to the
right, so that a greater quantity will be produced at any given price.

Shift in Supply
We know that a supply curve shows the minimum price a firm will accept to produce a given quantity of output.
What happens to the supply curve when the cost of production goes up? Following is an example of a shift in
supply due to a production cost increase.
Step 1. Draw a graph of a supply curve for pizza. Pick a quantity (like Q0). If you draw a vertical line up from
Q0 to the supply curve, you will see the price the firm chooses. An example is shown in Figure 3.11.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col11627/1.10

Chapter 3 | Demand and Supply

57

Figure 3.11 Suppy Curve The supply curve can be used to show the minimum price a firm will accept to
produce a given quantity of output.
Step 2. Why did the firm choose that price and not some other? That price is the price for which the firm
“breaks-even”, which means the cost of production for the last unit sold is equal to what the firm gets,
namely the price. Below this price, it is not worth it to sell this unit, so this is the minimum price the firm
will accept to sell that unit. The quantity Q0 and associated price P0 give you one point on the firm’s supply
curve, as shown in Figure 3.12.

Cost of
Production

Figure 3.12 Setting Prices The cost of production for that particular last unit is equal to the price a firm
will set for a product.
Step 3. Now, suppose that the cost of production goes up. Perhaps cheese has become more expensive by
$0.75 per pizza. If that is true, the firm will want to raise its price by the amount of the increase in cost ($0.75).
Draw this point on the supply curve directly above the initial point on the curve, but $0.75 higher, as shown in
Figure 3.13.

58

Chapter 3 | Demand and Supply

Increase
in Cost

Initial Cost of
Production

Figure 3.13 Increasing Costs Leads to Increasing Price Because the cost of production of the last
unit equals the price a firm will set for a product, if the cost of production increases, the price for the product
will also need to increase.
Step 4. Shift the supply curve through this point. You will see that an increase in cost causes an upward (or
a leftward) shift of the supply curve so that at any price, the quantities supplied will be smaller, as shown in
Figure 3.14.

Increase
in Cost

Initial Cost of
Production

Figure 3.14 Supply Curve Shifts When the cost of production increases, the supply curve shifts
upward.

Summing Up Factors That Change Supply
Changes in the cost of inputs, natural disasters, new technologies, and the impact of government decisions all affect
the cost of production. In turn, these factors affect how much firms are willing to supply at any given price.
Figure 3.15 summarizes factors that change the supply of goods and services. Notice that a change in the price of
the product itself is not among the factors that shift the supply curve. Although a change in price of a good or service
typically causes a change in quantity supplied or a movement along the supply curve for that specific good or service,
it does not cause the supply curve itself to shift.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col11627/1.10

Chapter 3 | Demand and Supply

59

Figure 3.15 Factors That Shift Supply Curves (a) A list of factors that can cause an increase in supply from S0 to
S1. (b) The same factors, if their direction is reversed, can cause a decrease in supply from S0 to S1.

Because demand and supply curves appear on a two-dimensional diagram with only price and quantity on the axes,
an unwary visitor to the land of economics might be fooled into believing that economics is about only four topics:
demand, supply, price, and quantity. However, demand and supply are really “umbrella” concepts: demand covers all
the factors that affect demand, and supply covers all the factors that affect supply. Factors other than price that affect
demand and supply are included by using shifts in the demand or the supply curve. In this way, the two-dimensional
demand and supply model becomes a powerful tool for analyzing a wide range of economic circumstances.

